Minutes.
So, um, I'll let you make some introductory remarks
and then I'll open it up
to questions from members. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, and, um, Mr.
Chair, I, I just wanted to confirm
that the committee had received a copy
of my written submission.
Thank you. So,
I'll just make some brief introductory comments,
and I'm sure you have some questions for me.
Uh, at the outset, I wish
to commend the Consumer Advocacy Alliance
for their strong advocacy
for improving patient safety New Zealand.
I've had the privilege of, uh, working, uh,
with the committee, uh, sorry, with the alliance
or, um, meeting with them,
and they're certainly a committed group
of advocates for patients.
I concur completely with this mission
that patient voice should be seen as central
to quality and safety.
And I acknowledge the barriers that some consumers
and consumer groups have experienced
to making their voices heard
and seen change affected in the system.
As you know, from my previous appearance
and through the written submission, HDCs role is to promote
and protect the rights of people using the health
and disability services as set out in the Code of Rights.
And the primary way in which we do this is
through the resolution of complaints about the quality
of care provided to people.
The code of Rights is enforceable by law
and through the powers of the HDC,
and the whole focus of the HDC is to identify what happened,
to affect resolution, and in particular to see
and recommend what actions can be taken to prevent
what happened occurring in the future.
HDC is independent.
We are set up as an independent Crown entity.
What this means is
that we are independent from government policy,
and we are independent, uh, from the health
and disability service provision.
And I think this allows us to be an effective watchdog
for the protection of consumers rights,
and we're appropriate to hold the system to account
for breaches of those rights.
HDC plays a key role in the amplifying the consumer voice,
given that our data is grounded entirely in the
experiences of consumers.
And we use our legislative powers to improve quality,
safety, and patient experience.
We have a broad
and flexible range of powers
to affect change at both individual and systemic level.
And we advocate for consumer centered health
and disability system where people's rights are understood,
upheld and protected.
HDC is certainly supportive of greater patient involvement
and quality and safety for the system
to truly become people centered
and equitable, people must have a say in the design
and delivery of the health system.
And patient experience needs to be seen
as vital in setting quality and safety priorities.
However, I'm not persuaded that the addition
of a further agency would address the issues
identified by the petitioners.
The addition of a further monitoring agency has potential,
in my view, to result in added complexity
and fragmentation, as well as confusion for people both in
and using the health and disability system.
Any new agency would, in my view, need to add value to
and strengthen the existing quality
and safety framework rather than
duplicate existing functions.
Change may be better affected by supporting current agencies
to work more collaboratively,
to use their respective leaders
to amplify the consumer voice
and improve quality and safety.
This may include consideration of how current
agencies can support Health New Zealand
and other providers
to support greater consumer involvement in the design
and delivery of the health system,
and address some of the longstanding structural barriers
to sustained quality improvement system.
So that's where I'd like to leave my opening remarks,
and, um, I'm happy to take questions.
Amish. Thank you very much, Amish.
And then, thank you Commissioner.
Um, in your written, uh, submission,
you have written there's currently multiple agencies working
to improve the safety and quality of the health sector.
Can you, can you give us, um, a list of those agencies
and how you all work together to improve the safety
and quality of the health sector?
Uh, there are, as you know, um, multiple agencies
that can look at, um, quality
and safety systems, for example, to
the Health Quality Safety Commission.
Uh, the Coronial system looks at, uh, deaths in, um,
the health and disability setting has the power
to make recommendations, uh, the Ministry of Health
agencies within the Ministry of Health, the enforcement arm,
the regulatory bodies, the councils, um,
and this system itself does internal reviews in terms of
how we collaborate there, there are
multiple examples of how we do that.
Uh, I think I saw from the, um,
submission made by ministries.
There's reference to the National Quality
and Forum, national Quality Forum, uh, where the, a number
of agencies come together to identify the harm
that they're seeing in the system,
and to look to prioritize how to address those.
HDC itself is also, uh, uh, takes the opportunity
to do cross-agency collaboration.
An example is that recently I've convened meetings relating
to assisted dying services
and have convened meetings with schemes, the registrar
dying, uh, health New Zealand, uh, the medical Council.
Um, and we identify issues from what we are seeing
and look to see who has the best levers
or powers to affect change
to those issues that were identified.
Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Al. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, with the committee's forbearance,
I have four concise questions that I'd like to ask
and, uh, that get to the heart of the petition.
Um, and I'm signaling that to the commissioner so
that she knows that I'm looking
for concise answers as, as well.
Um, commissioner, can you please explain where,
uh, if there is a central place where your recommendations
and their status are, um, collated
that is visible to the public?
So recommendations you make
for improvements in the health system.
Okay. Um, we do, as you're aware, Dr. Bell, uh,
publish our recommendations through, uh, our, uh,
publication of our opinions.
I, I do concur that there's no central place, I think, for
where, uh, recommendations are wholly visible.
Uh, certainly, uh, at, at, uh, an agency level,
we make over 400 recommendations a year.
Many recommendations are directed to systemic improvement.
We monitor those recommendations
and we get response to them.
Uh, and, uh, if we are not satisfied
that they haven't been implemented, we then engage
with the agency to whom they're directed to see
what mitigation strategies they're putting in
place to address the harm.
Okay. So their status is,
whether they've been acted on is not publicly available?
Uh, not directly,
but, uh, there is, I mean, there is the opportunity to do
that with an HDC, for example, having a page on our website,
uh, we, we can, we could potentially do that. Yes.
Thank you. In the interest of time,
I'll move on your letter notes that, um, you, uh,
look at organizational failings, uh, as well as individual
contributions to, um, to com
to the events that lead to complaints.
What about systemic issues like understaffing?
Uh, my concern is that the HDC, uh, would, uh,
rule on individual instances, uh,
but there is no way the HDC can present a message
to the public about how a risk like understaffing, uh,
is impacting care in New Zealand.
Uh, and that the group, the petitioners have asked
for a watchdog like, uh, that's active on systemic issues.
Uh, am I correct in saying that you cannot, um, uh,
reach adequate conclusions on those types of issues?
Actually, I, I, I would disagree with that.
And I think the Southern inquiry is an excellent example of
where we did identify, uh,
a focus on fiscal management rather than a focus on, um,
harm that was being caused to the patients.
What we did there was that the identified
that there weren't proper systems in place
to identify patient harm and respond adequately to it.
Uh, and we made, um, broad, um, ranging recommendations,
uh, around, um, navigation of that system for patients.
I, I'm sorry. I'm sorry to, I'm sorry to interrupt,
but in the interest of the committee's time, I just, um,
want to hold up to you the difference between that report,
which I acknowledge was very helpful,
and the fact that it's five years old in one department,
in one part of the country,
and understaffing would be a massive issue across almost
all of our hospitals.
Uh, we, we absolutely identify situations, uh,
systems and the context in which people are working, health,
staff working are part of every single, um,
complaint that we look at.
And we do raise concerns.
For example, recently we've raised concerns
with Health New Zealand around the lack of, um,
resource in stem cell trans transplants in Auckland,
and have asked Health New Zealand what are they doing about
that in order to address the potential patient harm
that is being caused to people waiting for that service
in the context of there being resource constraint for it.
So we do actually identify those systemic issues
and bring them to the attention of the agency, um,
that has responsibility for them.
Okay. You, you and I might disagree on the, um, scale of
that activity, the petitioners point
to the United Kingdom's, uh, patient Safety Commissioner
and your submission notes, that medicines
and, uh, that that commissioner, um,
is active on medicines and devices
and that we are missing that role in New Zealand.
Uh, but you point to reform that might be underway, uh,
on the regulation of devices in New Zealand.
Uh, would are, are you aware that
that legislation might include what the UK has,
which is essentially a watchdog function, not a regulation
of the devices, which we also need,
but a watchdog, someone who's there fighting for patients?
It wasn't weird that, that the bill actually
encompassed that.
Um, I, there, there are aspects of that
that I would most certainly, um, agree with.
Um, we, we had raised concerns, um, for example around,
um, medicine branch changes of, for example, Lamoin
and, uh, looked at, uh, how agencies needed to work together
to ensure that information was getting from p right
to the patient, and identifying the barriers in between
to ensure that there's good flow of information there.
So, so it is important in that area for there to be, um,
certainly some regulation
as we've identified now, submission.
So, so you are saying that you have the, um, powers
to undertake that watchdog function in relation
to devices and medicines?
Um, I would say yes, we did, we did that
with the Lamotrigine example.
We re we made a recommendation
that there be cross-agency collaboration.
In fact, coming out from that was a, um, safe prescribing
and dispensing hui,
which I understand has evolved now into
a medicine steering committee.
Thank you. And my final question, I'm grateful
to the committee for their forbearance.
The, um, petitioners also, uh, point out, uh, that the, um,
UK commissioner is a, um, officer of parliament,
and that means, uh, that would elevate the standing
of the patient voice in our system
and give more of a, a direct line like the parliamentary
commissioner for the environment
or the ombudsman has to two mps.
Do you think we, um, uh,
you are able to get traction in Health New Zealand
for changes, uh, uh, in the areas
that you recommend there be changes?
And if there are barriers,
would having a greater standing in parliament help you?
Um, in terms of standing question, potentially,
we do have, ni 90% of our recommendations are complied with.
And as I said before, if they are not complied with,
we follow up to try
and understand the reasons why they're not being complied
with, and then
to identify whether there should be other mitigation
strategies in place, uh, to mitigate against the harm
that was identified in the first place.
Thank you. Uh, Jenny. Thank, thank you.
Just a supplementary on this, you said, um, 90% are complied
with, and, uh, you follow up on the other 10%.
I'm making that assumption. Yes.
Um, of that 10%, uh,
what is the success rate of that
Actually? Um, that, that would
be, um, I don't have
that data immediately to handed.
I'm more than happy to gather that for the committee.
Can I just say there are multiple reasons why
recommendations are not complied with?
We've noticed recently, for example, that some
of the reasons for why, um, complaints, uh, sorry,
recommendations in districts are not being complied with is
because they've become part of a national program
and is no longer with sitting with the district.
It might be that a practitioner has retired and
therefore the recommendation has no more utility.
'cause that person is no longer practicing.
There are other people that do just simply decline
to do the recommendations.
We have power in that case,
and we've been using it to name the provider as an addendum
to the opinion giving rise to the, to those.
Okay. Just, just, uh, final on, on that.
So that data of that 10%, is that captured as well?
So, and publicly available?
Uh, it's, it's set forward to, um, Dr. Vel.
We, I, I don't believe that we publish the recommendations
and a, and a single repository, uh,
but I can certainly get that data for the committee.
And, um, from the signals giving to me, I'm certainly going
to be going away to my team to look to see how we can better
publicize, uh, the outcome of our recommendations.
Of course, they're also reporting our annual
report, the compliance rate.
Um,
Thank you. And
Example. Thank you.
Thank you, commissioner. Very good to have you here.
I appreciate you taking the time to join us this morning.
Thank you. Thank you. Wish you for day. Thank you.
Thank you.
There's a few papers that will have been, uh, tabled for
30 minutes.
Um, just yourself, no one else. Uh, there were
A few people there, but I lost them.
I think we
Shuffling. And, uh, thank
You. I ripped off my ear tag
and just went for it.
Welcome. No, good. Thank you. Good to have you here.
Um, I'll let you make some introductory remarks
and then I'm sure members will have
questions. Thank you, minister.
Yeah. Uh, well first of all, thank you very much for the,
um, work that the committee's about to do.
Um, I think it's gonna be quite important, uh, to make sure
that we hear from, uh, the people who are importing
and selling the pharmaceuticals that, that this is going
to work for them because it, it is devilishly uh, technical.
Um, and so I, I think the committee can, um, do a,
a really good job in making sure that they're fully heard.
Um, so far as the substance of it.
Um, it's, it's not a hugely complex, uh, bill.
Uh, the primary part of it is the so-called rule of two,
um, which is a policy that has enjoyed pretty wide support,
um, coming out of the Covid period where a lot
of people would look at, um, the, the need
to urgently get new treatments into New Zealand
as they were being developed.
Um, and often there were quite painful, uh, weights, uh,
'cause they weren't medisafe, uh, approved here.
And I think that the thought arose
in a lot of people's minds.
Why on earth does New Zealand do its own?
Um, you know, check when,
when actually several other countries with much larger,
better resource, uh,
medical consenting agencies have, have gone through it.
Are we really going to find something that they hadn't found
and that seemed unlikely?
Um, so I came into this actually thinking maybe we,
we don't actually, uh, need medisafe.
Um, maybe we should just rely entirely on the consenting
procedures in other countries.
I think there's a couple of reasons why that,
that probably wouldn't be very wise.
Um, one is that if we're asking
for a reciprocal relationship
with consenting agencies in other countries, uh, you have
to have something to reciprocate.
So having our own agency puts us in
the, in the club, as it were.
Um, and the second issue is that it's not simply a matter
of consenting something in principle,
but ensuring the quality of what actually comes, um, out
of the box is up to standard.
And this is particularly true
because a lot of, um,
pharmaceutical manufacturing now is done in countries which,
um, have developing economies
and don't always have the, the same level of standards
and care, um,
that we would expect in a
developed country like New Zealand.
So, uh, having medisafe there to
act on New Zealander's behalf, I, I believe is important.
Uh, however, uh, this bill puts in place a procedure,
uh, where they have, uh, 30 days nominally,
there's no consequence for failing at that,
but they have 30 days, um, to consent, uh, a medicine
that has been consented by any two off.
And I'll try and do this off the top of my head.
Uh, the uk, the eu, Switzerland, uh, Japan, Singapore,
Australia, Canada, or the United States.
So there's quite a, a range in that, you know,
developed countries with,
with fairly sophisticated consenting agencies,
uh, they can work with.
Um, incidentally, there are other countries such
as the uk which, which already use, um, the same thing.
So even within that family of consenting agencies, uh, a lot
of those are using reassurance pathways, um,
or verification pathways, I should say, um, with within the,
uh, uh, jurisdiction.
Um, so that is the, the first part,
and the, the law seeks to,
to set out a, a good way of doing that.
Um, but like I say, it would be interesting to,
to hear from, uh, the regulated parties how they see this,
this working, and I'm, I'm sure they will,
um, submit along with others.
Uh, the second, uh, part of the bill, uh, relates
to the prescribing, uh, of off label medicine.
So anybody who is a, uh, doctor, um, is able
to basically prescribe anything they like.
It's, it's just on them, regardless
of whether it's consented.
The bill extends that to nurse practitioners.
Um, and the thought is that when you want a lot
of off-label prescribing,
it's oftentimes when something's gone wrong,
like a pandemic, for example.
So, um, having a wider range of the workforce
who could do off-label prescribing, um,
but within obviously the, the constraints of the, um,
competence, uh, I think we'll will just give us a bit
of extra bandwidth for getting treatments
to people in a timely way.
Um, the final part of this, uh, is, uh, uh,
a change to the Medicines Classification Committee.
Uh, this is relatively technical,
but, um, the membership requirements at the moment require
there to be, um, a nominee from the, uh,
New Zealand Medical, uh, association.
Um, which, um,
after a last ditch effort
to quite dishonestly campaign against the end
of life choice, bill seemed to go outta business.
Um, so given that they no longer exist, um,
it's not possible to, um, uh, have a,
a nominee from that organization.
So we're, we're fixing that up, which is a,
i I would've thought a relatively
uncontroversial technical change.
But that's, that's the bill.
Um, so thank you for the work you're about to do on it.
You are Welcome. Point to order, Mr. Chair, point
Of order, Um, just for the sake of natural justice,
for those people who are on that particular committee
and are not here to respond to the minister's claims
about being dishonest, I, I just wonder if,
Well, it wasn't a committee, it was an association.
An association. I, I just think that, you know,
without being able to call them
and there are identifiable individuals
that we should just be careful in the committee
that we don't, uh, discredit them.
Thank you. We're open to questions.
Thank you for those remarks that address one of my, uh,
questions about why, uh, you're seeking
to have a reciprocal regime.
Um, I notice your remarks, um, give us confidence
that the, um, you are, you're seeking to engage with, uh,
to have relationships with, uh, international bodies
that have reputations for high, um,
high regard for patient safety.
Um, I'm reassured by that the, I wanted
to ask you a question quite out of left field.
Um, the, uh, I, I'm aware that, um,
the FDA asks, for example,
questions about Chinese clinical trials.
Uh, I'm not in a position to, um,
have a clear view on whether those, um,
concerns about Chinese clinical trials are appropriately
founded or, or not.
But I wanted to ask you, can you imagine this regime,
um, being equally open to those emerging
countries with emerging pharmaceutical industries
that may not yet be big players,
but who increasingly it looks like
do have really innovative, uh, products that
we don't wanna lock ourselves out of having them?
Hmm. Um, well, it's, it's a, it's a great question.
Um, and I, I could see it'd be a,
an interesting one politically, would we,
I think you're really asking would we put A-A-A-P-R-C
consenting agency on the same level as the FDA or,
Or how would you decide? Yeah,
Yeah. So
as I understand it, the, the legislation, um, doesn't set
in concrete who the, the agencies are.
That's up to the, uh, Medisafe approval who,
who they have confidence in.
Um, so I guess in, in theory at, at some time in future,
they could decide that they had confidence in, um, in, in a,
in a PRC consenting agency.
And, and it may well be the way of the world that, you know,
their technological sophistication's growing
very fast, and we'd want to do that.
Um, but I certainly don't, don't intend for the, the law
to just set in stone.
I mean, it's so possible, um,
that at some point we could lose confidence in, in one
of the, the, the, the what you call the counterparties.
Um, so yeah, it is possible.
I don't think the legislation rules that in out,
Thank you. The,
um, uh, membership of the committee.
Um, I see the very practical reasons why, uh,
the legislation needs to be changed.
I'm, I'm sorry, I've, I've misspoken there.
I mean, we, we do, we do put in statute, um, a list.
Um, so there would have to be future legislative change and,
and perhaps the committee could recommend adding
or subtracting a, uh, that's, uh, 22 A is the, um,
is the interpretation section, which,
which gives the recognized authority as, as defined as those
that list that I gave you.
Yeah,
I guess that's a, um, that's a question
whether those things might change supplement.
Well, at this, at this point,
that would be a statutory check.
I mean, if the committee was to recommend, uh, that, uh,
there should be an ability by order
and council, for example, to define them, um, then I,
you know, I mean, I'd be open to that.
I'd, I'd be interested to see
what the officials would think,
but, um, that's a possibility.
Or perhaps we, perhaps the committee would decide
that they support the, the bill as introduced
with a statutory list, um,
and would like to change that in the future.
Thank you, Karl. Uh, payment.
So, thank, thank you, minister.
Um, so we've got this list of, of a agencies, um,
and I appreciate the point of emerging markets,
but what's your view since the emerging markets
still will have access through the,
through the traditional routes,
do you think actually just keeping it
as a smaller list is going to actually give more confidence,
uh, to the New Zealand public?
Well, I mean, you,
you could make reasonable people could take
either of those positions.
You could say that, um, if the spirit of this legislation is
to make sure that New Zealanders get fast access
to the cutting edge, which is, you know,
what people want to save lives.
Uh, and we decided that, you know, medicine's development
and, and say the PRC, uh, had, you know, got to a stage
where you had to be there
'cause they were, they were producing the good stuff
fastest, then you could argue that,
of course they should be part
of the ver verification pathway.
Or you could take the view that, um,
this is quite a conservative regime
and the, the fast track as it were,
or the, the rule of two only applies to those countries
where, you know, we're, we're really rarely certain
and have long relationships with us
as New Zealand does have long historical ties with,
with a lot of these countries.
Um, and therefore, you know, if something new
and flash comes out of the PRC, then maybe it's gotta go
through the, the traditional track.
I mean, reasonable people
could take either of those positions.
Yeah. Just finals on this question, minister.
Um, do you accept that with some emerging markets,
there are questions around the ethics value that is given
to some medical innovation, including front facing, um,
apparent ethical standards
that without due diligence may not be as robust, and
therefore, would it be your view that it may be better
to keep the initial list in legislation?
Yeah, well, I mean, um, if you look at my opening remarks,
I, I gave the list
and then I, I misspoke, I,
I forgot actually in the statute rather than the
other documentation I've seen.
But, um, the reason for having that list is
that this is a regime which begins
with, you know, high trust.
And the reason for still having NetSafe as a verifier
of the quality of the actual content coming across the
border is because, as I alluded to that some
of these emerging markets don't always have the same sort
of culture of expectations and safety that we do.
Um, so I think all of that is, uh, true.
Um, but you know, the interesting question
that Isha has raised is that the world changes.
So, um, you know, perhaps 30 years ago, you,
you wouldn't have even dreamed that, uh,
world leading treatments would be coming out of the PRC.
Now, I think you, you could say in some ways
they, they're getting ahead.
So, um, you can simultaneously believe
that some countries have high standards and others don't,
and that, um, you know, as the world grows
and improves, more countries are becoming more reliable,
and we might wanna include them.
Gotcha. So, I, I understand the practical reasons
for changing the membership of the, uh, committee in this,
um, in this bill.
However, my, my read of the original bill is
that they're seeking a, a technical committee
and having those, um, uh,
and so I'm concerned about the move to make it
a ministerial appointment
where there might be other factors come into play.
What are the pros and cons
of having ministerial appointments to this committee versus,
uh, director general, um, uh, appointments?
Um, well, I, I, I mean, I think, I think the pros are
that frankly, we get some really calcified,
uh, decision making.
And I think that, you know, a minister should be able
to challenge, um, a and ask who should be on this committee.
Um, on the other hand, you might say that if you want
to completely professionalize this
and you, you want an unelected person to have that power,
um, then the status quo would work.
But I mean, I, I just give you examples where, um, you know,
there are high, uh, uh,
concentration vitamins.
Uh, there are people in our universities
who are having real trouble, uh, getting access to these,
um, for their, um, for their research.
And then you have them, uh, told, well, you know,
you, you can't do this.
Um, I think a, a minister should be able to give feedback.
So you, you know, you can make the argument politics bad,
keep it far away and professionalized,
but I also think in a democracy,
you've gotta have a, a loop as well.
Uh, thank you minister. I've got two
questions I want to ask.
Um, the first one is, what's the estimate number of medicine
and treatment will be concerned
through this fast track pathway?
Uh, look, I, I, I don't have that information.
I mean, I, I'm, I'm here to, I open up the rules
and, um, I hope it will be many, uh,
however, um, I, I don't know how many people will apply.
I hope it's lots. Um,
but that's, that's really up to the applicants.
Alright. My second question is,
you also mentioned just now, um,
under the neo neo legislation, um, the doctors
or any, any prescriber,
can any prescribe any off-label medicine if they want?
Is there any safeguard to monitoring how, what,
what medicine they're gonna prescribe
to prevent they benefit a specific pharmaceutical company?
So are you saying that you are concerned that, um,
a prescriber, a medical practitioner would be somehow
unduly influenced by the producer of the treatment
and over-prescribed? Is that, is that the question
Over, over-prescribed, but also, um, choosing a,
a specific pharmaceutical company product rather than the,
the, the general, um, common use, um, treatment available
And, um, right. So
they might prescribe a more expensive version
of a treatment because they've been unduly influenced by
Look, I, I, I mean, I, I think you could imagine
how a medical practitioner might do that,
but I have to say, you know, I know a lot
of medical practitioners in this country
and I, I kind of find it hard to believe that many of any
of them would behave that way, way, um,
that there's not a lot of benefit in them,
uh, for doing that.
We have a lot of restrictions on lobbying, uh, by medical
companies, um, on medical practitioners.
Um, but if they were to do that, uh, ultimately we have
to have some trust in a self-governing profession.
So we leave that to the medical council for them
to regulate themselves
because the alternative, um, is to have people
who are not, uh,
medical professionals regulating the medical profession.
And I think on balance, it's better
to trust the professions, whether it's lawyers,
whether it's plumbers, whether it's doctors.
I, I think they should be given some,
some trust and some autonomy.
So Will, would you think there will be a annual review
will be a a, a good approach to, to monitoring this,
this kind of situation?
You, you, the annual review? Yeah.
Or just do an annual review on,
Well, I, I, I mean, I, I don't think that, I mean,
the annual review is a parliamentary procedure.
Um, I don't think that
that parliament should be, um, you know, sort of trying
to second guess the medical council.
We've, whereas a parliament,
we've delegated the responsibility of medical ethics
and standards to the medical council.
You know, doctors are highly technical people.
We generally, uh, trust them to, to govern themselves
with the occasional intervention from parliament,
but not, not as a matter of course,
Hoa you to stop. Yeah.
Just wanting to stop on that.
And I'm wanting to explore, considering some members
of our society are more open to clinical risk
and, you know, wanting innovation
and access to, um, medicines.
And then there are those that are more, um, conservative
and wanting to ensure that, um, what they are engaging with
and accessing has, um, those safeguards.
So wanting to understand practically in the system, um,
the safety measures that will be in place, um, to ensure
that there's robust analysis, what is coming in
and knowing that we're opening up prescribing as well.
So, um, within the system, what are those safeguards?
Well, there's, the safeguards will, will be the same
as we, we currently have, possibly even better.
I, I mean, if, if you've had two, you know,
inevitably larger, better resourced foreign, uh,
consenting agencies go over a medicine, um, I would argue
that that is, you know, as good if not better, uh,
than medisafe itself going through it.
The other thing I would add is that, um,
while this seems like a big change, it's, it's not
as though medisafe doesn't already cooperate
and clear information with our friends
around the world doing similar work.
So, um, you know, I would, I would argue
that all we're doing here is making the process, um,
of consenting new medicines a bit faster
and formalizing the relationship with other friends
around the world that we rely on.
So I don't think that there's an increase in risk.
Uh, I think there's an increase in speed,
and I think we can do that by relying on two others when it
comes to the prescribing.
Um, I think, again, a lot of this does come back to we,
we have to trust the professionals.
Um, and, you know, I think ultimately a, a minister
or a parliament can, can intervene if they really want to.
And there's some areas where I think we should, but by
and large, uh, I think it's important that we say, look, if,
if you're a nurse practitioner, that's a big deal, you know,
for a lot of people that study their whole lives.
So it, it's really serious. They take it very seriously.
They're proud of it. They know
that they've got a certain scope of practice that they can,
can potentially prescribe things.
Um, and, and I, I think we should,
should trust them with the car to do that.
Yeah. I'm just, you got another one? Yeah.
Just to up off that, um,
'cause I am wondering about, you know, the protections from
potential undue influence on, uh, the overseas regulators
of the industry, um, in terms of influencing then
what comes into New Zealand.
So wanting to explore that with you,
but also recognizing Mr.
Chair, we've got a really good group of, um, submitters.
So it's quite diverse in terms of the voices
that are coming through, which is great.
Um, so yeah. Um, what are the protections
that will have in place to ensure
that the overseas regulators aren't getting that, you know,
industry, um, influence that might occur?
Well, I mean, I, I, I try to, you know,
I assume the best in people are, unless other,
unless given reason to think otherwise.
Um, I, I, I think that the truth is that, uh, you know,
the pharmaceutical industry, um, is there to,
to make a return for their shareholders,
but they do that by providing, you know, useful treatments,
which, which are changing the world at the moment.
I mean, I recently went to, uh,
the health research center on Grafton Road Auckland.
Um, they are editing the genes in people's liver,
inserting the new genes
and preventing the production of a toxic protein
that would've otherwise killed the patient.
I mean, you know, I think sometimes we have
to view this stuff with, um, you know, so are they going
to make their best case that
that technology should be available
and people should pay for it
and they should make money if they, if they succeed
and change people's lives?
Yeah, absolutely. So I mean, you know, ultimately, uh,
you can't really, uh, draw the line between
what you think is reasonable promotion
of amazing technologies and undue influence.
Um, but that's why I just have such a
sunny disposition of the world.
I'll get it, Jenny. And
A practical, um, example, if you could, of the,
the speed up pathway, um, to access new medicines.
Um, and if you could use, um, maybe, um, a blood cancer, uh,
treatment as an example, daratumumab mm-hmm.
That has been sitting around a long time mm-hmm.
Waiting to, um, be available mm-hmm.
Under this process, what, how would
that particular treatment progress as a, as a hypothetical?
Yeah, so I mean, you know, daratumumab is, is clearly, um,
a drug that many people would love to see funded,
and I understand that,
and I, I get, um, uh, a lot of letters.
It's, it's heartbreaking for people.
Um, the issue with Daratumumab is not the medical consenting
that Medisafe does,
or that, that this bill will change, um, that can be done
before in parallel or
after p uh, makes the decision
to use taxpayer money to buy it.
Um, now unfortunately, at this point, uh,
p has looked at the list of applicants
and it's calculated the, the benefits,
and then it's looked at the price.
Um, and we've managed to fund something like an extra
61 cancer drugs this year, which benefit, um,
or sorry, in the last year, which benefit, you know,
about 200,000, uh, new people that, uh,
from the new drugs were funded, including non-cancer.
But after all of that, daratumumab didn't make the,
the cut for funding.
Um, and you know, obviously that
that is harrowing for a lot of people.
Uh, the process has been fair,
but at this point, uh, there's,
there's just not enough money to, to get to that one.
Um, so this, this won't really affect Daratumumab,
there's no consenting issue with it.
Uh, it, it could be, it could be consented in a heartbeat.
The, the problem is the taxpayer funds to afford it.
Thank you. Just to up on, um, Carlos, Dr.
Chung's question about accountability.
Um, with the change in the panel
and the, the final ministerial decision making,
how do you see accountability in a terrible event?
For example, if something went pear-shaped, the
safeguards were accepted, and over time it proved
that this particular medicine was very unsafe.
What does accountability look like?
Well, the ul the ultimate accountability, um, is
with the government of the day.
And we, we know that we're all, we, we all know that, um,
uh, through our work here as, as members of Parliament.
Um, but if, if you look at where we are now, if, if that was
to happen today, um, what would the difference be?
Uh, I guess the difference would be that, um,
the decision had been made, um, by
a DG appointed, uh, committee to consent, um,
without the formal reliance on two other, uh,
consenting agencies.
Um, now it would be made by a panel which had been, uh,
appointed by, uh, a minister realistically on the advice
of the, um, ministry of Health.
Anyway, the same people that would appoint the D
that would advise the dg.
Um, and it would've been done
with formal reliance on the consenting of,
of two other agencies.
So, um, you know, I don't think a lot actually changes.
If anything, I think formalizing our connection
with related consenting agencies offshore probably make,
gives us greater, uh, safety.
Thank you Chair. Thank you chair.
Um, thank you minister.
This, the, the intent of this bill is
to speed up public access to medicines.
Um, you've talked about the funding of cancer drugs
and what this government's done to fund more,
but also some aren't funded.
Um, we have to go through a process currently,
med safe checks safety
and then farm can do application process.
How does this bill, uh, in the, how,
how is it changing the, the structure of that?
Do they, can they run concurrently? Um,
Yeah. Well, I, I actually,
I, if I recall
that it's actually a change that was made
by the previous government under al as minister, I think.
And then it came into effect shortly
after the government changed.
But, uh, we now allow concurrent, uh, approvals
for safety consent by medisafe and funding by pharma.
Whereas previously that's true that to run in series
and that just made a longer delay.
So you're, you're absolutely right.
And it, it, um, it is, it is
that concurrent is the right way to do it.
And I think that came into effect just
after the change of government.
The still doesn't change anything in
that role doesn't speed up.
Uh, uh, we we're not changing the concurrency here. No.
So, I mean, the concurrency is sort
of less important if the,
if the med safe is faster. Yeah, I guess.
All right. We've got a few minutes left if
there's any last questions.
Everyone's had a pretty good shot at it.
Alright, well thanks team.
And, um, I, I hope that this goes really well
and I'll, I'll look forward to seeing you,
how you guys report back, um, perhaps on the,
the flexibility of, of new consenting agencies. So
Thank you for your time this
Morning. Thank you. I see you.
Okay.